2.4ÿOmissions
Considerable controversy persists over whether, and to what extent, the law ought to regard inactivity as a sufficient basis for criminal liability.142ÿThere are powerful arguments of principle and practicality against the imposition of general criminal liability for failing to act in circumstances which give rise to a prohibited harm.143The strongest argument against imposing any such general criminal liability is that to do so would infringe the autonomy of the citizen in a qualitatively different manner to circumstances where liability is imposed for positive action. It is argued that it is legitimate for the law to criminalize holding V under water so that he drowns, but not to seek to compel a person to act by criminalizing, for example, his refusal to save a drowning stranger.144ÿHowever, in some circumstances the law can, consistent with this principle of autonomy, impose liability for omission?as where the drowning V is not a stranger but is D?s child. These categories of exceptional liability for omission are examined in the following sections. Irrespective of the existence of these exceptions, the arguments of individual autonomy have been challenged for their failure generally to respect obligations of social responsibility, particularly where the potential harm that can be averted (eg death) is disproportionate to the infringement of the person?s liberty (eg the simple act of plucking a child from a shallow pool of water).145
A further argument against imposing general liability for omissions is that to do so would infringe principles of legality. It is questioned whether the law can impose liability with sufficient clarity, specificity and certainty to respect adequately the principles of fair warning, fair labelling, maximum certainty, coherence with civil law, etc.146ÿAn additional argument is that failing to act cannot be regarded as a cause of harm, so there should be no general liability for omission in result crimes. But these denials of causation often take an unduly simplistic approach. Further arguments against the imposition of general criminal liability for omissions include the practical difficulty in defining the standard of duty which the law would impose on the person required to act, and of the potential unfairness in singling out for punishment a particular individual from the population as a whole, or a group of individuals, none of whom acted. In the discussion that follows, we can examine the extent toÿp. 46?which the law has satisfactorily overcome these objections in those exceptional categories of case in which liability for failure to act has been recognized.147
2.4.1ÿOffences of mere omission
Statutes frequently make it an offence to omit to do something. There are many legislative provisions requiring companies and others to submit returns of various kinds (tax, licences, etc) and making it an offence to fail to do so.148ÿThis type of offence is not restricted to corporate regulation: the driver of a vehicle which is involved in an accident must give his details to anyone who has reasonable grounds for requesting them, or must report the accident.149ÿA motorist who fails to provide a police officer with a specimen of breath when properly required to do so commits an offence.150ÿSo does a person legally liable to maintain a child if he fails to provide him with adequate food, clothing, medical aid or lodging.151ÿThese offences, although they provide that D is liable for a criminal offence by omission, are uncontroversial provided that they respect the general principles of criminal law. Most of them are of a regulatory nature, but there are controversial examples relating to more serious crimes. Modern legislation has created a number of offences for failure to report criminal activities, such as ss 19 and 38B of the Terrorism Act 2000,152ÿwhich respectively criminalize failure to report suspicions of certain terrorist offences having been committed, when the information is acquired in a professional capacity, and failure to disclose information which would be of material assistance in the prevention of an act of terrorism.153ÿThere are also numerous examples of offences of failing to control others, including even adult strangers, such as the offence in s 111A(1B) of the Social Security Administration Act 1992 (allowing false benefit claim).154
Parliament has demonstrated an increased willingness to impose positive duties upon citizens. As Ashworth explains,155ÿthere are an increasing number of duties to report, duties to prevent156ÿand duties to protect. Ashworth argues that there is now a trend towards the ?responsibilization? of professionals, other individuals and commercial organizations. Some of these positive duties are enforced by way of criminal offences. In his most recent engagement with this issue, Ashworth analyses the development of these offences, which he argues represent a new generation of omissions-based liability.157ÿAs he points out, these offences are not of general application, but only apply selectively. Ashworth suggests that the enactment of offences of this nature reflects the particular concerns of government and the legislature atÿp. 47?given points in history and do not proceed from a holistic examination of whether there are good arguments for general offences such as these. Ashworth convincingly concludes that it is necessary to consider whether it is right to have omissions offences in relation to money laundering but not murder, female genital mutilation but not other forms of child abuse, and bribery and tax offences rather than wounding.
At common law, offences of pure omission are also to be found, though rarely. A police officer was held to be guilty of a common law crime when, without justification or excuse, he failed to perform his duty to preserve the Queen?s peace by protecting a citizen who was being kicked to death.158ÿA citizen is guilty of an offence if he fails to respond to a constable?s call for assistance in keeping the peace.159ÿThe courts appear reluctant to extend common law offences to include liability for omission.160ÿThere has been some debate about the desirability of a general offence of failing to report a crime.161
2.4.2ÿOffences of omission causing a result
Where, as in the examples in the previous section, the offence is defined in terms of the failure to act itself, there are no special difficulties. Problems with omissions arise when the offence requires proof of a result as, for example, in homicide and other offences against the person. Stephen stated the rule for these offences as follows: ?It is not a crime to cause death or bodily injury, even intentionally, by any omission ??162
He gave the following famous illustration:
A sees B drowning and is able to save him by holding out his hand. A abstains from doing so in order that B may be drowned, and B is drowned. A has committed no offence.
Stephen went on to state exceptional cases where the law imposes a duty to act. If A in the example were B?s parent, A would have a duty to act and would be guilty of murder if he did not act and the child drowned. There are a number of problems which need to be considered.
(1)
Is the offence in question one under which conviction can arise for omission?
(2)
If so, is A under a duty to act?
(3)
If so, can we truly say that A has ?caused? the prohibited result?
(4)
Is the conduct in question properly regarded as an omission? In many cases the courts may strain the concept of an act so as to avoid difficulties, particularly in cases involving medical care terminating life.
2.4.2.1p. 48ÿIs the offence one capable of being committed by omission?
Assuming that the defendant?s conduct can properly be described as an omission, for example standing by and watching a person drowning or failing to feed a person, the question to determine is whether the offence with which he is charged can be fairly interpreted to apply to omissions.
Statutes generally
In statutory offences this question becomes one of construction. Is the verb, in its context, properly construed to include an omission? Glanville Williams has written:
In my opinion the courts should not create liability for omissions without statutory authority. Verbs used in defining offences andÿprima facieimplying active conduct should not be stretched by interpretation to include omissions. In general the courts follow this principle. They do not say, for instance, that a person ?wounds? another by failing to save him from being wounded, or ?damages? a building by failing to stop a fire. At least, this has never been decided.163
But Professor Williams himself pointed out that the courts have often held offences to be capable of being committed by omission although the statute did not expressly provide for it. As a matter of principle, it might be argued that the interpretation of a statute that is ambiguous in this regard ought to be resolved in the defendant?s favour. However, in many cases the words of the statute can be read to include omissions without straining their meaning.
There are numerous examples of the courts? construction of words to include liability for omission. InÿShama,164ÿa conviction was upheld for falsifying a document required for an accounting purpose contrary to s 17(1)(a) of the Theft Act 1968 where D omitted entirely to fill in a form which it was his duty to complete. InÿFirth,165ÿa doctor was held to have deceived a hospital contrary to s 2(1) of the Theft Act 1978 (now repealed), by failing to inform the hospital that certain patients were private patients. ?Obstruct?, ?falsify? and ?deceive? are all verbs which the courts have held to be capable of satisfaction by omission. So why not any other verb? The difficulty is to find any principle to limit such construction.
InÿAhmad,166ÿit was held that the words ?does acts? in a modern statute, the Protection from Eviction Act 1977, were to be strictly construed and were not satisfied by proof of an omission. A person commits an offence if he ?does acts? likely to interfere with the peace or comfort of a residential occupier with intent to cause him to give up occupation of the premises. D, having done such acts without any such intent, omitted, with the required intention, to rectify the situation he had created. He was not guilty. But in some instances even the word ?act? has been held to be satisfied by an omission.167ÿIt was held that a man ?commits an act of gross indecency? with a child by totally passive submission to an act done by the child.168ÿAs noted, the courts often sidestep the issue by treating the whole of the circumstances as forming the basis for liability, as inÿB169ÿwhere the issue was regarded as whether D ?acted with or towards a child? by remaining motionless as the boy pressed his erect penis against D.
p. 49Homicide
The courts have long accepted without debate that murder and manslaughter are capable of commission by omission.170ÿMost cases of homicide by omission have resulted in convictions for manslaughter but there is at least one reported case of murder. InÿGibbins and Proctor,171ÿa man and the woman with whom he was living were convicted of murder of the man?s child by withholding food. By living with the man and receiving money from him for food, the woman had assumed a duty towards the child (see later). The judge was held to have rightly directed that they were guilty of murder if they withheld food with intent to cause the child grievous bodily harm, as a result of which she died. If the child had sustained grievous bodily harm but not died, the court would no doubt have held the defendants guilty of an offence under s 18 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861.172ÿThe commission of this offence seems to have been an essential constituent of the Ds? liability, in the way the case was left to the jury. It would be strange indeed if causing death should be capable of commission by omission and causing grievous bodily harm not. If that were the case it would mean that D was not in breach of a duty to act until death occurred, at which point the duty was retrospectively imposed, and one of the aims of the criminal law, to deter wrongdoing or prevent wrongdoing from continuing, would be impossible to fulfil. Those are surely unacceptable consequences.
Parliament has intervened to create specific statutory offences of causing or allowing the death or serious injury of a child in the same household as the offender. These are discussed in detail in Chÿ15.
Non-fatal offences against the person
Although the courts have accepted that homicide can be perpetrated by omission, they have assumed that assault or battery requires an act.173ÿThe words ?kill? and ?slay? in an indictment have been held to be satisfied by proof of an omission, so why not ?assault? or ?battery?? It is said that if D digs a pit for V to fall into, he commits an assault.174ÿWhy should it be different if he digs the pit without any such intention but then, forming the intention, leaves it unfilled, intending for V to fall in? Glanville Williams argues in respect of a similar case that ?in such circumstances of act-omission the total conduct should be regarded as an act ??.175ÿBut ?should be regarded as? suggests a fiction and criminal liability should not turn on fictions. And his proposal would not meet the case where the hole has been dug by D?s gardener and D, hearing that V is coming, decides to leave it unfilled.
Why should not the court legitimately interpret this situation as one where D causes V immediate unlawful violence? This view may derive some support from the decision inÿIreland176ÿthat D?s silent telephone call can constitute an assault. Again, however, it is likely that the courts would regard the assault as deriving from D?s whole course of conduct by making the call coupled with his remaining silent. It is submitted that it would be realistic for the courts to recognize that one can ?assault?, no less than ?kill?, by omission.177
As for committing battery by omission, whereas assault only requires proof that D caused V to apprehend unlawful violence, battery requires the application of unlawful violence.ÿp. 50?Can it be said that D can apply force by omission? Such an interpretation of ?apply? might be a more difficult extension than with assault where the word ?cause? is the operative one.178
The discussion in the previous two paragraphs has dealt with the issue of whether there can be liability for assault and battery by omission, assuming that the elements of duty and causation can be established.
As a separate matter, there can be liability for supervening fault in assault or battery?where D?s course of conduct creates a dangerous situation towards any person and D omits to negate or remove the risk. InÿFagan v Metropolitan Police Commissioner,179ÿwhere D accidentally drove his car onto a policeman?s foot and then intentionally left it there, the majority of the court held that there was an assault (technically a battery) on the ground that, because D remained sitting in the car, there was a continuing act, not a mere omission. This again suggests, if not a fiction, a straining of words. Why should it be different if D had got out immediately, leaving the car on the officer?s foot? The case would nowadays be decided under the exceptional category of duty recognized inÿMiller,180ÿnamely that D had created a dangerous situation by his act of driving onto V?s foot and he then came under a duty to take reasonable steps to alleviate that danger. InÿSantana-Bermudez,181ÿthis reasoning was applied to uphold D?s conviction for assault occasioning actual bodily harm where D told a police officer who was about to search him that there were no needles on his person. The officer was pricked by a needle in D?s pocket.
On the basis ofÿGibbinsÿ(in the previous section), it would seem that causing grievous bodily harm contrary to s 18 of the 1861 Act may be committed by omission. Although under s 20 of the 1861 Act the offence of wounding or inflicting grievous bodily harm would require proof of an ?infliction? of a ?wound? or grievous bodily harm, it is not clear that the words would be construed more narrowly than ?cause? in this context.182ÿSince the offence under s 47 of the 1861 Act requires proof of an assault or battery and the ?occasioning?, that is, ?causing? of actual bodily harm, subject to what was said earlier regarding assault, there is no reason to assume that this offence cannot also be committed by omission.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee (CLRC) recommended that liability for omissions in offences against the person should be confined to murder, manslaughter and their proposed offences of causing serious injury with intent, unlawful detention, kidnapping, abduction and aggravated abduction.183ÿThe Home Office in its reform proposals184ÿredrafted the offences against the person in terms of causing injury and serious injury. This approach would present few problems in relation to liability for commission by omission. The law would be simplified.185
Offences against property
The Draft Criminal Code Team, being obliged by their terms of reference to follow the CLRC recommendations, concluded that if injury to the person was to be incapable of commission by omission, so,ÿa fortiori, should be damage to property. This leads to the following illustration:186
D is employed as a night watchman at a factory. His duties are to take all reasonable steps to ensure the safety of the building. D sees that a small fire has broken out. There is an adjacent bucket of sandÿp. 51?with which, as he knows, he could easily put out the fire. Having a grievance against his employer, he walks away and lets the fire burn. The factory is destroyed. He is not guilty of arson.
Such a conclusion may be unacceptable to the courts. If so, the remedy is in their hands. ?Destroy? and ?damage? in the Criminal Damage Act 1971187ÿare capable of being construed to include omissions. It is submitted that in light of the shift in the proposals for reform of offences against the person this approach also needs to be reconsidered.
2.4.2.2ÿWho owes a duty?
Assuming that the offence itself is one capable of being committed by omission, the next question is whether the individual defendant is one who may be under a duty to act.188ÿSince most cases of omission have concerned homicide, the duties so far recognized189ÿhave been examined in the context of the duty to preserve life. This context is important because when a fatality occurs there is an enhanced danger that the courts will find a duty in previously unrecognized circumstances where the inquiry involves an entirelyÿex post factoÿrationalization of the relationships involved. Ashworth has convincingly argued that the duty-situations developed by the courts in the current law of manslaughter by omission are unprincipled, unpredictable and capable of producing injustice.190
Family and other relations
It is difficult to describe with precision the categories of relationship that might trigger criminal liability based on an omission. Ashworth, in an illuminating analysis of the cases, has suggested that liability for omission may arise if there is a settled relationship of dependence.191
Parents owe a duty to their children to act to save them from harm.192ÿPresumably children above the age of responsibility owe a corresponding duty to their parents.193ÿOther close relationships, whether of a family,194ÿdomestic, business or other nature, possibly impose similar duties. The criminal law is increasingly willing to protect wide categories of individuals on the basis of their existence within an extended family,195ÿbut it is unclear how far it would be willing to extend liability. The courts have managed to avoid identifying with precision those relationships which can be sufficient to ground liability. Indeed, they have failed to identify what is significant about those relationships in which a duty has been imposed. As a matter of principle, it can be argued that the important issue is not one of blood or formal legal relationship, but of interdependence.196
p. 52?A further unresolved issue is what the relationship duty obliges D to do if it does arise. This would seem to be resolved on a case-by-case basis. One important issue will be whether the offence can be committed where D performed an act which he believed to be sufficient to fulfil his duty, or if he had a reasonable belief that what he was doing was sufficient. These issues will become intertwined with the mens rea of the offence.
It is equally unclear when, if ever, the relationship duty ends. In the case of a parent and child, for example, a parent of a child of normal capacity may well be absolved on the attainment of the child turning 18, but this could hardly be so in the case of a disabled dependent child.
Voluntarily incurred obligations
The need to define precisely the categories of relationship which trigger a duty has often been avoided by the courts because the particular case calling for adjudication has involved a number of overlapping bases of liability including, significantly, the fact that D has voluntarily undertaken a position of responsibility towards V. For example, a person who has undertaken to care for a helpless and infirm relative197ÿwho has become dependent on him may be held to owe a duty, particularly where he is to receive some reward for caring for the other.198ÿThe holder of a public office requiring him to care for others may also incur criminal liability by failing to do so.
There may be wide-ranging circumstances in which a person might be treated as owing a legal duty because he voluntarily engaged in a certain activity and can therefore be treated as also voluntarily assuming a positive obligation to V. D?s voluntary engagement in a business, or in a specific activity,199ÿor in a relationship with V may all suffice.200
It is submitted that people who jointly engage in a hazardous activity whether lawful (like mountaineering), or unlawful (eg involving misuse of drugs offences201) may also owe duties to one another. The courts have exhibited reluctance to impose obligations on this basis alone. InÿSinclair Johnson and Smith,202ÿthe court considered the manslaughter liability for those who failed to seek medical care for a comatose fellow drug-taker, but any duty was based on the previous friendship and bond between the individuals, rather than the joint act of drug administration. The convictions were overturned, but on a different point relating to causation. The duty of care point was only relevant (though in effectÿobiter) as far as Sinclair and Johnson were concerned. Johnsonÿwould notÿhave had a duty of care?he was a medically unqualified stranger. Sinclair would have had a duty of care in part because of their close bond, but also because he paid for and supplied V with the methadone and because he remained with V throughout his unconsciousness. InÿRuffell,203ÿa manslaughter conviction was upheld where D had been jointly involved in drug taking with the deceased. D, who had placed V outside in temperatures of six degrees, had also been a friend and host to V, and it is unclear on precisely which basis his duty arose. The matter is discussed further later in relation to the case ofÿEvans.
This category of duty could surely extend to unrelated persons who voluntarily undertake responsibility. It is arguable, therefore, that D who sees a stranger, V, drowning, but whoÿp. 53?voluntarily begins to go to V?s assistance could be liable should he then abandon the rescue. Underlying bases for imposing a duty in such circumstances include the argument that in such cases D may be the best placed to act and that V may have relied to his detriment on D?s actions?in the case of the drowning swimmer, V may be worse off by relying on D since he may, for example, have stopped calling for assistance from other potential rescuers.204
The extent to which a ?voluntary assumption of responsibility? is a free-standing basis for the imposition of a duty, and the scope of circumstances in which it might apply, remain unresolved. One of the most controversial cases may well turn on the existence of this duty. InÿStone and Dobinson,205ÿalthough the defendants? liability for manslaughter arose in part from their family relationship, and their cohabitation with the victim, their voluntary undertaking of responsibility for the victim seems to have been significant in the court?s conclusion that a duty was owed, although it seems that the voluntary undertaking was implied.
As in other categories of duty, the courts have failed to define the content of the duty arising from voluntary assumption. The conviction of the defendants inÿStone and Dobinson, both of whom had limited mental capacity, suggests that the courts might adopt a strict line when faced with claims that the accused had done what he believed to be sufficient to fulfil his duty. In terms of the termination of such a duty, one who has undertaken the duty can probably divest himself of it only by passing it on to some responsible authority or other person.
Contractual duties
A well-established basis for imposing criminal liability for omissions is where D has contractually accepted the obligation. This could be seen as a subset of the previous category?the voluntary assumption of responsibility.206
A contract may found a duty in criminal law to persons, including those not party to the contract but likely to be injured by failure to perform it. The most obvious examples in this category are those who are employed as carers or health-care professionals. InÿPittwood,207ÿa railway crossing gate-keeper opened the gate to let a cart pass and went off to his lunch, forgetting to shut it again. Ten minutes later a haycart was struck by a train while crossing the line and V was killed. D was convicted of manslaughter. It was argued on his behalf that he owed a duty of care only to his employers, the railway company, with whom he contracted. Wright J held, however, that:
there was gross and criminal negligence, as the man was paid to keep the gate shut and protect the public ? A man might incur criminal liability from a duty arising out of contract.208
Again, the courts have not addressed the issue of whether the duty owed under a contract exists strictly within the bounds of the terms of that contract. If D is a lifeguard whose terms of employment stipulate that he finishes at 5 pm daily, is he under a duty to save V who isÿp. 54?drowning at 5.05 pm? It seems clear at least that the duty will terminate when the relationship ends, as when an employee leaves the service of his employer.
Creating a dangerous situation/supervening fault
Where D?s conduct puts in peril V?s person, his property, his liberty or any other interest protected by the criminal law, and D is aware that he has created the peril, he has a duty to take reasonable steps to prevent the harm in question resulting.209ÿThe initial conduct may be done without any kind of fault but, if D fails to intervene, it is undoubtedly his conduct which is the cause of the harm. For this reason the principle may apply to a wider range of offences than can be committed by simple omission. This category of liability might therefore be treated as entirely separate from the four bases for imposing liability previously discussed. This category of liability differs from the voluntary assumption of responsibility category discussed earlier because this category can give rise to liability where D?s original conduct creating the danger was accidental.210
The principle derives fromÿMiller,211ÿwhere D, a squatter in V?s house, went to sleep holding a lighted cigarette. He awoke to find the mattress smouldering. He did nothing to put it out but moved into an adjoining room and went to sleep there. The house caught fire. D was convicted of arson contrary to s 1(1) and (3) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971. The House of Lords held that the judge had rightly directed the jury that, when D woke up, he was under a duty to take some action to put the fire out. Lord Diplock said:212
I see no rational ground for excluding from conduct capable of giving rise to criminal liability conduct which consists of failing to take measures that lie within one?s power to counteract a danger that one has oneself created, if at the time of such conduct one?s state of mind is such as constitutes a necessary ingredient of the offence.
The Court of Appeal had upheld the conviction on a different basis:
We would only say that an unintentional act followed by an intentional omission to rectify it or its consequences, or a reckless omission to do so when recklessness is a sufficientÿmens reaÿfor the particular case, should only be regardedÿin totoÿas an intentional or reckless act when reality and common sense so require; this may well be a matter to be left to the jury. Further, in the relevant analysis we think that whether or not there is on the facts an element of adoption on the part of the alleged offender of what he has done earlier by what he deliberately or recklessly fails to do later is an important consideration.
In some cases the application of this ?continuous act? theory would apparently produce different results from the duty theory. For example, inÿAhmad213ÿif D could be deemed to have acted intentionally (ie with intent to cause the residential occupier to give up occupation) when he rendered the flat uninhabitable, the difficulty of convicting him would have disappeared. This theory, again, involves an undesirable legal fiction. Fictions should have no place in the criminal law. Lord Diplock preferred the ?duty to avert danger? to the ?continuous act? theory but only on the ground that the former is easier to explain to a jury. It is submitted, however, that they are different in substance, as the example based onÿAhmadp. 55?shows.214ÿUnderÿMiller, D must have the mens rea required for the crime with which he is charged at the time of the omission to avert the danger he has created.
Again, one issue to be resolved is the extent of any such duty. Although expressed in terms of ?reasonable? steps, it is unclear how objective this test is to be in application, and in particular whether it is sufficient that D believes on the facts as he sees them that the remedial measures he took were sufficient. Moreover, it is unclear how the law would deal with an individual who claimed impossibility of performance of such a duty.215
The scope of theÿMillerÿdoctrine remains unclear. The Court of Appeal has been prepared to adopt an extended interpretation of theÿMillerÿprinciple in the case ofÿEvans.216ÿIn that case D gave her half sister, V, heroin to take, knowing that she was a recovering addict. V slipped into a coma. D became aware of that and chose not to call the emergency services but to sit with V. V died. The Court of Appeal upheld D?s conviction for gross negligence manslaughter. The court faced two difficulties in doing so: (a) identifying a duty; and (b) establishing that D?s act caused V?s death. For present purposes we are interested in the duty question. The court did not deal with the case on the basis of a sibling duty nor on the basis solely that D had supplied the drugs, nor on the basis that they were engaged in a dangerous activity together. The court focused on whether D owed a duty when her sister lapsed into a coma. In applyingÿMiller, albeit in extended form, the court held that there was a duty.
The extension ofÿMillerÿwas significant. Although Miller was charged with criminal damage which at that time was satisfied by proof of objective recklessness, the House of Lords held that his duty only arose on hisÿsubjectiveÿrealization of the danger. Gross negligence manslaughter is also a crime based on objective fault, but inÿEvansÿthe court held that the duty arises when D realizes orÿoughtÿto have realized the danger.217ÿThe court did not provide further detailed examination of whether the duty arises from the creation or the realization of the danger.218ÿIt is certainly the case that the full scope of theÿMillerÿdoctrine has not been satisfactorily explained. Nevertheless, it is submitted that the courts will be likely to continue applying aÿMiller-type analysis in these cases on various possible bases.
In these exceptional cases where D supplies drugs and remains present but fails to make reasonable efforts to seek medical attention when V experiences serious illness, Lord Diplock?s statements inÿMillerÿare likely to be construed broadly to establish that a duty arises when D became aware (or ought to have become aware) of the events resulting from his act. Liability might also be imposed for V?s death caused or contributed to by D?s failure to act where a sufficient duty is imposed when D realized/ought to have realized V?s post-injection predicament and: (a) D is in a pre-existing relationship of interdependence (parent, carer, etc) which persists irrespective of V?s self-administration (eg the husband of a woman who has self-injected and who realizes or ought to have realized that she is having breathing difficulty); or (b) because D has voluntarily assumed responsibility being engaged with V in a dangerous joint enterprise; or (c) where D has voluntarily assumed a duty to care for V who is in such a state. An example might be where V becomes dependent on D?s assistance (eg where D starts to care for V, who has overdosed at a party, by moving him from one room to a more secluded space, but then abandons him, leaving V worse off as he is less likely to be seen and rescued by others).219
p. 56?One aspect of the scope ofÿMillerÿis at least clear: it is necessary to invoke theÿMillerÿprinciple only in the case of a result crime requiring fault where the act causing the result is done without the relevant fault at that time. Where the offence requires no fault, there is no need to rely on it. InÿWings Ltd v Ellis,220ÿD Ltd, a tour operator, published a brochure which, unknown to D, contained misrepresentations. On discovering the truth, D did all they could to correct the errors but, subsequently, V read an uncorrected brochure and booked a holiday in reliance on it. D was convicted under s 14(1)(a) of the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 of making a statement which they knew to be false and, s 14(1)(b), recklessly making a false statement. The statement was ?made? when it was read by V and, by then, D knew it was false. The Divisional Court, applyingÿMiller, quashed both convictions. D had done all that could reasonably be expected to correct the false trade descriptions. The prosecutor appealed in respect of the offence under s 14(1)(a) only. The appeal was allowed. Subject to a statutory defence which was not pleaded, the House held that s 14(1)(a) created an ?absolute? offence.221ÿD knew the statement was false and no other fault was required. There was no room for the application ofÿMiller.
Where the offence is one requiring fault, whether mens rea strictly so called or negligence, it is submitted that theÿMillerÿprinciple is of general application.222ÿIf D, sitting alone in the passenger seat of a car, were accidentally to knock off the handbrake, so that the car rolled away, it is submitted that he could be convicted of murder if he wilfully omitted to put the brake on again, intending the car to run over and kill or cause grievous bodily harm to V. Similarly, D who locks the door of a room not knowing that V is inside and, having learned that V is within, omits to unlock the door should be liable for false imprisonment.223ÿSince the principle requires the appropriate element of fault at the time of the subsequent omission, it is submitted that liability should arise in such a case.224
Further clarification from the courts would be welcome on how it is to be determined when the duty imposed underÿMillerÿcomes to an end. In the case ofÿLewin v CPS,225ÿa decision not to prosecute was upheld where D left his heavily intoxicated friend, V, asleep in a car in the summer heat in Spain where he died. The Divisional Court observed that D?s responsibility for the welfare of his passenger ?persisted for so long as the vehicle was in motion, but ? would normally have come to an end as soon as the vehicle was properly parked in a safe place at the end of its journey ? [it] could only persist in a way which would be relevant to the offence of manslaughter if a reasonable person would have foreseen [the risk of death]?. The court went on, ?the young man who was left in the unlocked car was an adult, not a small child or dog?.226ÿHad not D created a dangerous situation by leaving V, heavily intoxicated, in the car? Was he not at fault for not summoning help when he realized the temperature had risen so high? Is the case distinguishable fromÿEvans? Ashworth argues that the court?s conclusion emphasizes that an assumption of responsibility alone is not enough for manslaughter, without knowledge (or reasonable grounds for realizing) that the other person is in a life-threatening situation.227
2.4.2.3p. 57ÿCausation and omissions
Once it has been determined that there is an offence that can be committed by omission and a defendant who can be held liable owing to the existence of a relevant duty, there remains the question of whether his failure to act has caused the prohibited harm.228
Considering again the example of the child, B, left to drown by his parent, A, Stephen saw no difficulty in saying that the death (or bodily injury) was caused by A?s omission. Others have taken a different view.229ÿIt has been argued that B?s death would have occurred in precisely the same way if his parent, A, had not come on the scene for any reason, so how can A be said to have caused it? He simply allowed it to happen. The cause of B?s death could be said to be simply his falling into the water. Nothing else had to happen. He just drowned. If A and strangers C, D and E had walked by the pool together ignoring B?s plight it is impossible to say that, as a matter of fact, A has caused the death but C, D and E have not.
There is a danger of oversimplifying things and seeking to resolve the entire issue of liability on the basis of causation without regard to the prior question of duty.230ÿIn the case of A, C, D and E, it is possible to describe their failure asÿafactual cause of B?s death, and if A is under a duty towards B, it is therefore possible to say that A?s failure to act may beÿaÿlegal cause of B?s death.231ÿAs the Draft Code puts it (cl 17(b)):
a person causes a result which is an element of an offence when ? (b) he omits to do an act which might prevent its occurrence and which he is under a duty to do according to the law relating to the offence.
It may be that this provision goes beyond the present law (and beyond what is desirable) in one respect: it extends liability to results which the act D omitted to doÿmight haveÿprevented. Arguably, it should be limited to results which that actÿwould haveÿprevented.232ÿIn the drowning child example, if A is B?s parent and fails to act, under the present law it is submitted that the prosecution would have to establish that the failure on A?s partÿwouldÿhave, not might have, prevented B?s death.
2.4.2.4ÿAct or omission?
It is not always easy to distinguish between an act and an omission. Some of the most difficult examples of the distinction arise in the context of a cessation of medical treatment. If a doctor is keeping a patient alive by cranking the handle of a machine and he stops, this looks like a clear case of omission. So, too, if the machine is electrically operated but switches itself off every 24 hours and the doctor deliberately does not restart it. Switching off a functioning machine looks like an act; but is it any different in substance from the first two cases?233ÿOn the other hand, is it any different from cutting the high-wire on which a tightrope walker is balancing234ÿ(which is an act, if ever there was one)? Is the ending of a programme of dialysis an omission, while switching off a ventilator an act? Is the discontinuance of a drip feed, which is keeping a patient alive, by withdrawing the tube from his body an act235ÿandÿp. 58?failure to replace an emptied bag an omission? In theory, it might be possible to distinguish between these cases. It seems offensive if liability for homicide is so heavily dependent on such very fine distinctions of this kind; but it appears that that is the case.236
A doctor is, no doubt, under a duty to make reasonable efforts, in the light of customary medical practice and all other relevant factors, to keep a patient alive.237ÿUnfortunately, this does not solve the problem because the content of any duty there may be to ?keep alive? is different from that of the duty ?not to kill?. The issue has become further complicated with recognition that public authorities must respect not only the right to life under Art 2 of the ECHR, but also the right to be free, in the course of treatment, from inhuman and degrading treatment under Art 3. The doctor must also respect the Art 8 privacy rights of the patient which might involve a declared wish to die, or for treatment to be withheld in specific circumstances. The Mental Capacity Act 2005 (ss 24?26) provides statutory recognition of the ability of a competent person to give a binding refusal of treatment (eg ?do not resuscitate?). The individual can provide a binding advance refusal where he is presently competent but anticipates that he may lose that competence as his condition deteriorates.
The difficulties are brought into sharp focus where parents refuse their consent to operations on young children suffering from disabilities knowing that without the operation the child will die. It has been held that such parents are not necessarily guilty of a homicide offence if death ensues.238ÿInÿRe B (A Minor),239ÿon these facts, the child was made a ward of court, and the court gave consent as being in the interests of the child. Dunn LJ said that the decision of the parents to allow the child to die was one which everyone accepted as ?entirely responsible?. It was a decision, it seems, that the parents could lawfully take, so that the death of the child, if it had followed, would not have been an actus reus. Templeman LJ thought there might possibly be cases ?where the future is so certain and where the life of the child is bound to be full of pain and suffering that the court might be driven to a different conclusion??that is, to allow the child to die.240ÿYet there is no doubt that if the parents?or anyone?did any positive act to kill the child, they would be guilty of murder, subject to a relevant defence of necessity.241ÿThe undoubted duty of parents to preserve the life of their child is different from, and more restricted than, their duty not to kill it.
InÿArthur,242ÿa doctor, having noted that the parents of a Down?s Syndrome child did not wish the child to survive, ordered ?nursing care only? and the administration of a drug, allegedly to stop the child seeking sustenance. At the trial of the doctor for attemptedÿp. 59?murder of the child, Farquharson J directed the jury that it was for them to decide whether ?there was an act properly so-called on the part of Dr Arthur, as distinct from simply allowing the child to die?. Simply allowing the child to die would apparently have been lawful,243ÿand withholding food was, according to the medical evidence put by the judge to the jury, ?a negative act??a mere omission. It is submitted that a better view is that an omission to provide such a child with food and the ordinary necessities of life ought to be equated with an act causing death rather than with an omission to perform an operation or to take some other extraordinary action. The position seems to be the same with a helpless, elderly person, incapable of taking decisions. It may be lawful for his family and the doctor to decide that an operation which would prolong a useless and painful life should not be performed; but it surely cannot be lawful to starve him to death, whether with the assistance of drugs or not.
Terminating life
The distinction between act and omission was the basis of the important decision inÿAiredale National Health Service Trust v Bland.244ÿB, a victim of the Hillsborough stadium disaster, had been in a persistent vegetative state for three and a half years and medical opinion was that there was no hope of improvement or recovery. The Trust, with the support of B?s parents, applied for a declaration that they might lawfully discontinue ventilation, nutrition and hydration by artificial means and end medical treatment except to allow B to die peacefully. The application was resisted by the Official Solicitor, who argued that the withdrawal of artificial feeding would constitute murder. The judge granted the declaration and the House of Lords, affirming the Court of Appeal, upheld it. There was no doubt about the intention to kill. The object of the exercise was to terminate B?s life. It was accepted that to kill by administering a lethal injection or any similar act would be murder; but what was proposed was held to be not an act, but an omission. Lord Goff said:
The question is not whether the doctor should take a course which will kill his patient, or even take a course which has the effect of accelerating his death. The question is whether the doctor should or should not continue to provide his patient with medical care which, if continued, will prolong his patient?s life.
Lord Goff added that it might be difficult to say that it was in the patient?s best interests that the treatment should be ended but that it could sensibly be said that it was not in his best interests that it should be continued. ?Ending? and ?not continuing? look uncommonly like the same thing; but the former expresses the conduct as an act, which could not beÿp. 60?justified, and the latter as an omission, which could.245ÿInÿRe A (Conjoined Twins: Surgical Separation), the Court of Appeal held, rightly, it is submitted, that surgery to separate twins was an act.246ÿInÿR (Burke) v GMC,247ÿLord Phillips stated thatÿBlandÿshould not be read as requiring a persistent vegetative state (PVS) patient to be kept alive simply because he has made an advance directive to that effect. Section 26 of the Mental Capacity Act requires compliance with a valid advance directive to refuse treatment, but the crucial issue is what is in the best interests of a patient.248
ECHR concerns
InÿGlass v UK,249ÿthe ECtHR gave detailed consideration to the position under English law, acknowledging first: ?the regulatory framework ? is firmly predicated on the duty to preserve the life of a patient, save in exceptional circumstances. Secondly, that same framework prioritises the requirement of parental consent [in the case of a child] and, save in emergency situations, requires doctors to seek the intervention of the courts in the event of parental objection.?
InÿR (Burke) v GMC,250ÿthe High Court recognized that a withdrawal of artificial feeding and hydration which a competent patient wishes to continue or which an incompetent person has previously, when competent, directed to continue would infringe Art 8 of the ECHR.251ÿIt was also held that withdrawal of treatment would breach Art 3 if it exposed the patient to acute mental and physical suffering, irrespective of the awareness of the patient to that suffering. The court inÿBurkealso suggested that it would be difficult to envisage circumstances in which the withdrawal of artificial feeding from a sentient patient would be compatible with the Convention. The Court of Appeal subsequently reversed the High Court?s decision, upholding the legitimacy of the GMC Guidelines on the withdrawal of nutrition and hydration. The Lord Chief Justice emphasized the duty on doctors to take reasonable steps to keep the patient alive. The Court of Appeal concluded that the guarantees in Arts 2, 3 and 8 did not alter the common law position. The court endorsed the comments of Munby J in the High Court,252ÿthat Art 2 does not entitle anyone to continue with life-prolonging treatment where to do so would expose the patient to ?inhuman or degrading treatment? breaching Art 3, but that at the same time, withdrawal of life-prolongingÿp. 61?treatment within the common law parameters will not breach Art 2. Lord Phillips stated that this conclusion:
does not, however, lead to the further conclusion that if a National Health doctor were deliberately to bring about the death of a competent patient by withdrawing life-prolonging treatment contrary to that patient?s wishes, Article 2 would not be infringed. It seems to us that such conduct would plainly violate Article 2. Furthermore, if English law permitted such conduct, this would also violate this country?s positive obligation to enforce Article 2. As we have already indicated, we do not consider that English criminal law would countenance such conduct. However, the fact that Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Convention may be engaged does not, in our judgment, advance the argument or alter the common law.253
InÿNHS Trust A v M, NHS Trust B v H,254ÿit was confirmed that the withdrawal of nutrition and hydration by artificial means from a patient in a persistent vegetative state would not infringe Art 2.
It will be appreciated from the discussion of these difficult medical cases that the courts struggle to distinguish between acts and omissions. The difficulty all too often leads to distinctions without any apparent difference, or in some cases to a sidestepping of the issue by a convenient treatment of the actus reus as the defendant?s conduct viewedÿin toto.
2.4.2.5ÿ?Easy rescue? statutes
As noted, there are hotly contested philosophical arguments about the desirability of creating liability for omissions in general, and much of the academic discussion has centred on the liability for failing to rescue.255ÿMany jurisdictions have dealt with the ?shallow pool? case by creating a specific offence for anyone failing to take steps which he could take without any personal risk, to save another from death or injury. It is important to note that these statutes do not equate omissions with acts. The offender is liable for a specific statutory offence of failing to rescue (with its own penalty) and not the harmful result which D may have prevented and has allowed to happen. Thus, D is not necessarily guilty of homicide if the victim dies.256
Some commentators have called for the enactment of an ?easy rescue? or ?Bad Samaritan? offence such as that adopted by our European neighbours,257ÿcertain US states258ÿand elsewhere. A clear example of the type of offence is provided in the Northern Territory in Australia in the Criminal Code Act, s 155. This makes it an offence for any person who, being able to provide rescue, resuscitation, medical treatment, first aid or succour of any kind to a person urgently in need of it and whose life may be endangered if it is not provided,ÿp. 62?to ?callously?259ÿfail to do so. Powerful arguments have been made that such an offence would promote social cooperation, which is itself worthy of promotion by criminal regulation and that such laws are ultimately necessary for individual autonomy to be realized.260
The objections to Bad Samaritan laws are well rehearsed.261ÿThey have been criticized as being so vague that they are either unenforceable and/or contravene the principle of legality. Some of the examples from around the world, including those such as the Northern Territory?s offence, may support the criticisms. They are alleged to impose too great a burden on investigators and leave too much to prosecutorial discretion since there may be hundreds of potential defendants who failed to rescue (as opposed to the usual scenario with one criminal who acted). In addition, it is questionable how well they operate in practice since there seem to be very few prosecutions, at least in common law jurisdictions, which is not to say that they do not operate at a symbolic level in encouraging greater communitarianism.262ÿMore fundamentally, they are claimed to represent a more significant infringement on autonomy (being told you must do X) and impose ambiguous burdens (what to do if someone else has started to rescue) of uncertain duration (when does the duty end).
Despite this, the Bad Samaritan laws are numerous263ÿand have an ancient pedigree.264ÿIt is possible to draft legislation narrowly enough to meet or outweigh the objections. In particular, it is possible to include elements of mens rea such as that in the Northern Territory?s offence which requires ?callousness?.265
2.4.2.6ÿAct, omission or control?
The numerous complications which flow from the law?s attempts to distinguish between acts and involuntary movement, states of affairs and omissions has prompted some academics266ÿto argue that the problems can be avoided if the focus shifts to whether D had ?control? of the potential consequences of his behaviour at the relevant time.267ÿDuff suggests:
A control requirement does not distinguish action from omission: whether X is an outcome of my action or an event that I could do but do not prevent, I have the same degree of control over whether X ensues, and thus can be criminally responsible on just the same basis in both cases.268
Adopting a focus on whether the defendant had control will, Duff claims, make ?criminal responsibility for omissions unproblematic?.269ÿThere are many theoretical benefits to be gained from a control approach, but the criminal law?s practical response to omissions would nevertheless remain problematical in several ways.270

